Hi there.
This is the De La Rue.
And welcome back.
So we now have a good understanding of first statement.
And in the last lecture we looked at this particular four statement example, and we have seen how this
first statement could be represented in different ways.
And we also said that this is the most common way in which a first statement would be represented.
That is, we will have an initialization statement and we will have some condition.
And then we have this expression where we increment the variable, right?
And in this lecture, let's go ahead and explore the first statement a bit more, and we will look at
the common ways in which a first statement is typically used.
And this is really very helpful for complete beginners, because we will see the different ways in which
the initialization statements and the condition expressions here, the boolean conditions as well as
the expression statements can be set up for different problems.
So it's going to be very useful for complete beginners and we will especially look at how to traverse
or iterate through a one dimensional array.
We already have a basic idea about that from the last lecture and we will also see how a two dimensional
or a multi dimensional array can be iterated using nested for statements.
So we will also look at nested first statements and we will also look at a simple example where we will
use a first statement, but we will not be iterating through an array.
So it is an example where an array is not used in a first statement.
So let's go ahead and look at this.
First thing is let's change this.
Here we are incrementing by one.
So here we are iterating through this particular array.
Let's just change it to two.
So we are going to increment the variable I width two in each iteration it's going to be incremented
by two.
So this is just to show that the incremental expression need not be just one.
We can also increment by more than one.
So let me just recompile this.
So this is in the basics demo class and here we are in the basics directory.
So I'm just making the changes in the main method.
Okay.
There you go.
So it's sprinting 0 to 4, six and eight.
So it's going to skip one, three, five, seven, and it's going to just print 02468.
So it's printing all the alternate values and this can be any value.
You can also make it three or four and so on.
So that's one thing.
Now let's say we want to print this in reverse order.
So we start from here from nine and we need to print in the reverse order.
So since we need to start from nine, so we have to take a dot length.
Minus one, because we know that the last element would be dot length, minus one, and here we would
decrement instead of increment.
And this decrement can also be by any value, it can be equal to IE minus two and so on.
And here since we are going in the backward direction, it has to be greater than or equal to zero.
So we will decrement until we reach the index number zero.
So this should.
Print and reverse order.
There you go.
So it is printing all the values in the reverse order.
Now, let's say we want to reverse the elements in this particular array.
Sometimes we would want to do that.
And Java Library also provides a method in one of the classes in order to reverse the elements in the
array.
So when we say we want to reverse the elements, nine has to go into the last element has to go into
the first position.
And the the element at the zero position should go into the last position and it has to go here and
one has to go into the eighth position.
So we will do that in in using the first statement.
But in each iteration we are doing, we are swapping a paid off elements.
So in the first iteration, we would swap zero and nine and in the second iteration we would swap one
and eight.
In the third we would swap two and seven and then three and six and then four and five.
And, and we would end with that.
So in each iteration, we need to have access to two index numbers, right?
For example, in the first iteration it would be zero and the index corresponding to this, which would
be nine.
So we would have to use two variables for this.
Now, I would like you to pause the video here and try to write the logic for that.
You can take around 5 minutes for that, and I'm going to take 5 seconds break, and then I will come
back and show you how to write the code.
But I would suggest you to pause the video and try it, and then you can see whether your solution matches
mine or not.
I hope you have done it.
So let's go ahead and write the code and you can compare it with mine.
So the first thing is we need two variables.
First is I would be zero.
Then we need another variable, let's call it as Jay and Jay would be.
Let me also copy this.
We would need this here.
J would be I.R.A. length minus one, and here I would be incremented by one in each iteration, and
J would be decrement in each iteration.
And now coming to this one, the condition expression it would be a less than j oc.
That is it.
And we need to also write the logic here.
So the condition is islas dengue.
So initially I would be zero j would be nine here and in the second iteration it would be one and eight.
So those elements would be swapped in the third iteration, two and seven would be swabbed and three
and six and four and five.
That's when I is less than J.
And in the subsequent iteration I would be five and J would be four, and that's when we exit the first
statement.
So that's what when we have even number of elements like in this case there are ten elements.
But if we have our number of elements, then three and five would be swab.
We would increment A to three and J would be decrement at five.
And after that I and J would be four.
So the condition is still less than J, but we have is equal to J here.
And so the first statement would exit there.
So the condition is same whether we have even number of elements are or number of elements, that's
it.
And now coming to the logic in the body.
So the first thing is.
Let's define a temp variable.
And store the element in the first iteration, it would be zero element.
So we will say array of AI.
So that is stored in temp, which means that we can.
Take the git element and save it in its position.
And then after that.
In the G8 position, we will have to store the value in temp, which has the original value that was
at position.
So that is the swab.
And let's go ahead and print this.
So the condition here is I.
Less than or equal to this.
Or you can just have less than an A-plus plus.
And let's just print in the same row.
So let's just say plus and whitespace.
So it would print all of the elements in the same row.
So we are printing from zero to length minus one.
So this is just for printing the elements.
So let's go ahead and let me compile and recompile and run it.
There you go.
So the elements have been reversed.
So that's it.
So when I is equal to J, that's when we have exited the loop.
Now we can also, instead of J, we can also say Ira.
Dot leant by to.
So we can also use this condition because I r length is 1010 by two is five.
So when as long as I is less than five, we are good.
But as soon as I becomes five, then we exit the loop.
So this is a different way in which the same expression, the same four statement can be written.
So this is just to give you an idea and how we can represent our statement in different ways and still
get the same result.
Here you go.
So you get the same values.
Now, here, what is happening is in each iteration we are performing this division operation.
So if you have 1000 or a million elements here, then it would be computationally intensive.
It's going to be very expensive.
So because in each iteration, we have to do this computation so we can do an optimization.
And the optimization is I will take this expression from here and define another variable here in the
initialization statement part, and let's call it as middle.
And let's have it like this.
And now we will say.
Medal.
So in this case, we know that the initialization statement part gets executed only once.
So this expression would also be computed only once, and that would suffice for us.
So it's calculated once and that value would be plugged here.
And so with each iteration, we are not recalculating this value.
It's only done once.
So this is done only once.
We know that this is this gets evaluated only once.
But the condition expression as well as the expression list is what gets evaluated with each iteration.
All right.
So let's go ahead and re verify our results.
Once again, it's unchanged, so we get the same values.
So that's an optimization.
Now, can you think of if there is a way to optimize this further?
So here we are saying division by two.
Now, you may recall that.
The unsigned right shift can be used for that because it is equivalent to division by power of two.
So here we will make it one because we need to divide by two.
So this is like a length divided by two to the power of one.
And we know that the the bit shift operators are more or more efficient than multiplication and division.
So we can use an unsigned right shift for division operation.
So let's re verify once again.
So the output is the same.
So that's with that.
Now, I also want to say that mostly we use four statements to iterate through data structures like
arrays or other data structures, which we will explore later.
But first statement can also be used in other problems.
Also, like, for instance, if you just want to iterate through some logic for some number of times
it can be used.
Now one example, simple example where an array is not used is one example problem, which you which
is typically seen in common in programming courses as to to count the number of divisors of a particular
value.
For example, for example, if there is a value X and a value y would be a divisor of x if x mod y results
in zero, if the remainder is zero, when you divide by Y, then that's a common.
Then we say that y is it is a divisor for x.
So for a given number, let's count the number of divisors it has.
So let's say.
Let's write it.
It's very simple.
Let's call the number as 24 and we are supposed to find all the we are supposed to find how many divisors
it has.
So let's use a variable.
And Divisor 421 would include one as well as 24 for 24 one as well as 24.
And there would be there can be other divisors in between one and 24.
So it has to start with one.
I'm not zero and we need to iterate till 24.
So that is less than or equal to x and I plus.
Plus.
And in each iteration we make a check, we say f, x mod I is equal to zero.
Then it's a divisor.
Then I is a divisor.
So we are iterating from 1 to 24.
So in this case, we need to increment the count.
And this is also a common programming pattern here.
We have a first statement and each in each iteration we do a check.
And if the check succeeds, only then we execute some logic.
That's a common programming pattern that you encounter.
Now, let's just print the count.
Okay.
And let's also print the actual divisor also.
So let's take this.
B I so looks good.
So these are all the divisors for 24.
One, two, three, four, six, eight and 12.
So if you put more of 24 of any of these numbers, you get a reminder of zero.
And so there are eight of them.
So that's what that.
Now, let's say for instance.
Let's now look at a nested first statement.
Nested first statements also come up very commonly when we are programming, especially if you have
a data structure like an array, and if each element is also another array that is like a two dimensional
or a three dimensional array or any data structure whose elements are other data structures.
Then you can use a force statement where the outer force statement will iterate through the data structure
itself like an array, and the inner first statement will iterate through the will iterate through each
of the elements because each of them element can be something like an array.
So let's look at that.
And one thing is that I mentioned earlier in the last lecture is the scope of these variables ends with
the far loop.
So here we have the entire is equal to zero.
And you can see that we used another int equal to zero here because this eye is different from this,
because the scope of the variable I ends with this particular block.
And similarly we also have the AI here and the variable of x.
The scope would be from here till the end of the method, the main method later we will formally also
look at variable scope in a couple of lectures from now.
So the first thing is this.
So let me just copy a little bit of code here.
So here, let's say these are.
So here we have a two dimensional array and we are calling it as 210 grids.
So it represents some grades of the student, let's say this element here, the first element of the
to the array is an array.
And it and it has the grades of students in a particular section or a particular class.
And this is the grades of students in the second section or the second class and grades for the third
class.
Now we want to iterate through this particular.
2D array and display all of these elements.
So first we'll have an outer first statement and within that.
We would have another.
So fast we will say.
And I equals to zero.
I less than.
Land.
So that would be three, because there are three elements.
And then we would have to.
So in, in each iteration we have an element which is a one dra.
So we need to iterate through that and for that we use another nested for loop.
So let's have a new variable called int j is equal to zero and j less than.
We can say student grades of I.
Okay.
So in the first iteration, this would be student grades of zero, which is nothing but this array,
which corresponds to the first class and we have to say dot length because we need to iterate through
these elements and j plus plus.
Okay.
And here.
So displaying.
Of Section.
And those grades will be printed here.
So we'll assess them.
And instead of I.
This would be.
Okay.
So we are displaying the students of the grades of students in each section and within each section
we are displaying these grades.
Okay.
There you go.
So you're saying the spelling rights of Section Zero and we're displaying the grades and of Section
one is being shown here and two is being shown here.
Now, one last, final thing is let's also find the highest grade in each of the sections, and let's
also display that.
So let's use a variable called Max here.
Let's say Max is equal to zero.
And we need to find.
The max.
So we'll say here in the second iteration will say F.
So we are iterating through one of the each of the sections here.
So in the first iteration we are it will be this array in the second iteration of the outer loop.
So this would be the second array, the second class.
And then I is equal to three.
We are iterating through.
I is equal to two.
We are iterating through this thing.
The inner far loop would iterate through this particular one.
So here we are saying if student grades of I am a J is greater than max.
So it is initially zero.
Then we need to reassign.
Max bet.
Student greats of icon magic.
And finally, we will print the max value here.
There you go.
So the outer loop is printing this.
And in each iteration we are also finding the max and the max value is printed here.
So over here the max is 90.
And when we have when we are in the second iteration, we are finding the max in this particular area.
So in the second iteration, the max would be re initialized again.
In fact, it is declared inside this for loop.
So Max is declared once again.
So in the second iteration it prints 71 because that's the highest.
And in the final iteration, Max would be 91.
So that's how you can find the maximum value here.
So that's about it.
Thank you.
And do code this up and that's it and happy coding and see you in the next lecture.